Source: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Document: NIST AI 100-1 — Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0)
URL: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1
Licence: Public domain (US Government work)
Published: January 2023

---

NIST AI 100-1

Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0)

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1

January 2023

U.S. Department of Commerce
National Institute of Standards and Technology

The Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF) is intended to be a living document. NIST will review the content and usefulness of the Framework regularly to determine if an update is appropriate; a review with formal input from the AI community is expected to take place no later than 2028.


Executive Summary

Artificial intelligence (AI) technologies have significant potential to transform society and people's lives – from commerce and health to transportation and cybersecurity to the environment and our planet. AI technologies can drive inclusive economic growth and support scientific advancements that improve the conditions of our world. AI technologies, however, also pose risks that can negatively impact individuals, groups, organizations, communities, society, the environment, and the planet. Like risks for other types of technology, AI risks can emerge in a variety of ways and can be characterized as long- or short-term, high- or low-probability, systemic or localized, and high- or low-impact.

The AI RMF refers to an AI system as an engineered or machine-based system that can, for a given set of objectives, generate outputs such as predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments. AI systems are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy (Adapted from: OECD Recommendation on AI:2019; ISO/IEC 22989:2022).

While there are myriad standards and best practices to help organizations mitigate the risks of traditional software or information-based systems, the risks posed by AI systems are in many ways unique (See Appendix B). AI systems, for example, may be trained on data that can change over time, sometimes significantly and unexpectedly, affecting system functionality and trustworthiness in ways that are hard to understand. AI systems and the contexts in which they are deployed are frequently complex, making it difficult to detect and respond to failures when they occur. AI systems are inherently socio-technical in nature, meaning they are influenced by societal dynamics and human behavior. AI risks – and benefits – can emerge from the interplay of technical aspects combined with societal factors related to how a system is used, its interactions with other AI systems, who operates it, and the social context in which it is deployed.

These risks make AI a uniquely challenging technology to deploy and utilize both for organizations and within society. Without proper controls, AI systems can amplify, perpetuate, or exacerbate inequitable or undesirable outcomes for individuals and communities. With proper controls, AI systems can mitigate and manage inequitable outcomes.

AI risk management is a key component of responsible development and use of AI systems. Responsible AI practices can help align the decisions about AI system design, development, and uses with intended aim and values. Core concepts in responsible AI emphasize human centricity, social responsibility, and sustainability. AI risk management can drive responsible uses and practices by prompting organizations and their internal teams who design, develop, and deploy AI to think more critically about context and potential or unexpected negative and positive impacts. Understanding and managing the risks of AI systems will help to enhance trustworthiness, and in turn, cultivate public trust.

Social responsibility can refer to the organization's responsibility "for the impacts of its decisions and activities on society and the environment through transparent and ethical behavior" (ISO 26000:2010). Sustainability refers to the "state of the global system, including environmental, social, and economic aspects, in which the needs of the present are met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs" (ISO/IEC TR 24368:2022). Responsible AI is meant to result in technology that is also equitable and accountable.

As directed by the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-283), the goal of the AI RMF is to offer a resource to the organizations designing, developing, deploying, or using AI systems to help manage the many risks of AI and promote trustworthy and responsible development and use of AI systems. The Framework is intended to be voluntary, rights-preserving, non-sector-specific, and use-case agnostic, providing flexibility to organizations of all sizes and in all sectors and throughout society to implement the approaches in the Framework.

The Framework is designed to equip organizations and individuals – referred to here as AI actors – with approaches that increase the trustworthiness of AI systems, and to help foster the responsible design, development, deployment, and use of AI systems over time.

The AI RMF is intended to be practical, to adapt to the AI landscape as AI technologies continue to develop, and to be operationalized by organizations in varying degrees and capacities so society can benefit from AI while also being protected from its potential harms.

The Framework is divided into two parts. Part 1 discusses how organizations can frame the risks related to AI and describes the intended audience. Next, AI risks and trustworthiness are analyzed, outlining the characteristics of trustworthy AI systems, which include valid and reliable, safe, secure and resilient, accountable and transparent, explainable and interpretable, privacy enhanced, and fair with their harmful biases managed.

Part 2 comprises the "Core" of the Framework. It describes four specific functions to help organizations address the risks of AI systems in practice. These functions – GOVERN, MAP, MEASURE, and MANAGE – are broken down further into categories and subcategories. While GOVERN applies to all stages of organizations' AI risk management processes and procedures, the MAP, MEASURE, and MANAGE functions can be applied in AI system-specific contexts and at specific stages of the AI lifecycle.


Part 1: Foundational Information

1. Framing Risk

AI risk management offers a path to minimize potential negative impacts of AI systems, such as threats to civil liberties and rights, while also providing opportunities to maximize positive impacts. Addressing, documenting, and managing AI risks and potential negative impacts effectively can lead to more trustworthy AI systems.

1.1 Understanding and Addressing Risks, Impacts, and Harms

In the context of the AI RMF, risk refers to the composite measure of an event's probability of occurring and the magnitude or degree of the consequences of the corresponding event. The impacts, or consequences, of AI systems can be positive, negative, or both and can result in opportunities or threats (Adapted from: ISO 31000:2018). When considering the negative impact of a potential event, risk is a function of 1) the negative impact, or magnitude of harm, that would arise if the circumstance or event occurs and 2) the likelihood of occurrence (Adapted from: OMB Circular A-130:2016). Negative impact or harm can be experienced by individuals, groups, communities, organizations, society, the environment, and the planet.

"Risk management refers to coordinated activities to direct and control an organization with regard to risk" (Source: ISO 31000:2018).

While risk management processes generally address negative impacts, this Framework offers approaches to minimize anticipated negative impacts of AI systems and identify opportunities to maximize positive impacts. Effectively managing the risk of potential harms could lead to more trustworthy AI systems and unleash potential benefits to people (individuals, communities, and society), organizations, and systems/ecosystems. Risk management can enable AI developers and users to understand impacts and account for the inherent limitations and uncertainties in their models and systems, which in turn can improve overall system performance and trustworthiness and the likelihood that AI technologies will be used in ways that are beneficial.

The AI RMF is designed to address new risks as they emerge. This flexibility is particularly important where impacts are not easily foreseeable and applications are evolving. While some AI risks and benefits are well-known, it can be challenging to assess negative impacts and the degree of harms.

AI risk management efforts should consider that humans may assume that AI systems work – and work well – in all settings. For example, whether correct or not, AI systems are often perceived as being more objective than humans or as offering greater capabilities than general software.

1.2 Challenges for AI Risk Management

Several challenges are described below. They should be taken into account when managing risks in pursuit of AI trustworthiness.

1.2.1 Risk Measurement

AI risks or failures that are not well-defined or adequately understood are difficult to measure quantitatively or qualitatively. The inability to appropriately measure AI risks does not imply that an AI system necessarily poses either a high or low risk. Some risk measurement challenges include:

Risks related to third-party software, hardware, and data: Third-party data or systems can accelerate research and development and facilitate technology transition. They also may complicate risk measurement. Risk can emerge both from third-party data, software or hardware itself and how it is used. Risk metrics or methodologies used by the organization developing the AI system may not align with the risk metrics or methodologies uses by the organization deploying or operating the system. Also, the organization developing the AI system may not be transparent about the risk metrics or methodologies it used. Risk measurement and management can be complicated by how customers use or integrate third-party data or systems into AI products or services, particularly without sufficient internal governance structures and technical safeguards. Regardless, all parties and AI actors should manage risk in the AI systems they develop, deploy, or use as standalone or integrated components.

Tracking emergent risks: Organizations' risk management efforts will be enhanced by identifying and tracking emergent risks and considering techniques for measuring them.

AI system impact assessment approaches can help AI actors understand potential impacts or harms within specific contexts.

Availability of reliable metrics: The current lack of consensus on robust and verifiable measurement methods for risk and trustworthiness, and applicability to different AI use cases, is an AI risk measurement challenge. Potential pitfalls when seeking to measure negative risk or harms include the reality that development of metrics is often an institutional endeavor and may inadvertently reflect factors unrelated to the underlying impact. In addition, measurement approaches can be oversimplified, gamed, lack critical nuance, become relied upon in unexpected ways, or fail to account for differences in affected groups and contexts.

Approaches for measuring impacts on a population work best if they recognize that contexts matter, that harms may affect varied groups or sub-groups differently, and that communities or other sub-groups who may be harmed are not always direct users of a system.

Risk at different stages of the AI lifecycle: Measuring risk at an earlier stage in the AI lifecycle may yield different results than measuring risk at a later stage; some risks may be latent at a given point in time and may increase as AI systems adapt and evolve. Furthermore, different AI actors across the AI lifecycle can have different risk perspectives. For example, an AI developer who makes AI software available, such as pre-trained models, can have a different risk perspective than an AI actor who is responsible for deploying that pre-trained model in a specific use case. Such deployers may not recognize that their particular uses could entail risks which differ from those perceived by the initial developer. All involved AI actors share responsibilities for designing, developing, and deploying a trustworthy AI system that is fit for purpose.

Risk in real-world settings: While measuring AI risks in a laboratory or a controlled environment may yield important insights pre-deployment, these measurements may differ from risks that emerge in operational, real-world settings.

Inscrutability: Inscrutable AI systems can complicate risk measurement. Inscrutability can be a result of the opaque nature of AI systems (limited explainability or interpretability), lack of transparency or documentation in AI system development or deployment, or inherent uncertainties in AI systems.

Human baseline: Risk management of AI systems that are intended to augment or replace human activity, for example decision making, requires some form of baseline metrics for comparison. This is difficult to systematize since AI systems carry out different tasks – and perform tasks differently – than humans.

1.2.2 Risk Tolerance

While the AI RMF can be used to prioritize risk, it does not prescribe risk tolerance. Risk tolerance refers to the organization's or AI actor's readiness to bear the risk in order to achieve its objectives. Risk tolerance can be influenced by legal or regulatory requirements (Adapted from: ISO GUIDE 73). Risk tolerance and the level of risk that is acceptable to organizations or society are highly contextual and application and use-case specific. Risk tolerances can be influenced by policies and norms established by AI system owners, organizations, industries, communities, or policy makers. Risk tolerances are likely to change over time as AI systems, policies, and norms evolve. Different organizations may have varied risk tolerances due to their particular organizational priorities and resource considerations.

Emerging knowledge and methods to better inform harm/cost-benefit tradeoffs will continue to be developed and debated by businesses, governments, academia, and civil society. To the extent that challenges for specifying AI risk tolerances remain unresolved, there may be contexts where a risk management framework is not yet readily applicable for mitigating negative AI risks.

The Framework is intended to be flexible and to augment existing risk practices which should align with applicable laws, regulations, and norms. Organizations should follow existing regulations and guidelines for risk criteria, tolerance, and response established by organizational, domain, discipline, sector, or professional requirements. Where established guidelines do not exist, organizations should define reasonable risk tolerance. Once tolerance is defined, this AI RMF can be used to manage risks and to document risk management processes.

1.2.3 Risk Prioritization

Attempting to eliminate negative risk entirely can be counterproductive in practice because not all incidents and failures can be eliminated. Unrealistic expectations about risk may lead organizations to allocate resources in a manner that makes risk triage inefficient or impractical or wastes scarce resources. A risk management culture can help organizations recognize that not all AI risks are the same, and resources can be allocated purposefully. Actionable risk management efforts lay out clear guidelines for assessing trustworthiness of each AI system an organization develops or deploys. Policies and resources should be prioritized based on the assessed risk level and potential impact of an AI system.

When applying the AI RMF, risks which the organization determines to be highest for the AI systems within a given context of use call for the most urgent prioritization and most thorough risk management process. In cases where an AI system presents unacceptable negative risk levels – such as where significant negative impacts are imminent, severe harms are actually occurring, or catastrophic risks are present – development and deployment should cease in a safe manner until risks can be sufficiently managed. If an AI system's development, deployment, and use cases are found to be low-risk in a specific context, that may suggest potentially lower prioritization.

Risk prioritization may differ between AI systems that are designed or deployed to directly interact with humans as compared to AI systems that are not. Higher initial prioritization may be called for in settings where the AI system is trained on large datasets comprised of sensitive or protected data such as personally identifiable information, or where the outputs of the AI systems have direct or indirect impact on humans.

Residual risk – defined as risk remaining after risk treatment (Source: ISO GUIDE 73) – directly impacts end users or affected individuals and communities. Documenting residual risks will call for the system provider to fully consider the risks of deploying the AI product and will inform end users about potential negative impacts of interacting with the system.

1.2.4 Organizational Integration and Management of Risk

AI risks should not be considered in isolation. Different AI actors have different responsibilities and awareness depending on their roles in the lifecycle. For example, organizations developing an AI system often will not have information about how the system may be used. AI risk management should be integrated and incorporated into broader enterprise risk management strategies and processes. Treating AI risks along with other critical risks, such as cybersecurity and privacy, will yield a more integrated outcome and organizational efficiencies.

The AI RMF may be utilized along with related guidance and frameworks for managing AI system risks or broader enterprise risks. Some risks related to AI systems are common across other types of software development and deployment. Examples of overlapping risks include: privacy concerns related to the use of underlying data to train AI systems; the energy and environmental implications associated with resource-heavy computing demands; security concerns related to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the system and its training and output data; and general security of the underlying software and hardware for AI systems.

Organizations need to establish and maintain the appropriate accountability mechanisms, roles and responsibilities, culture, and incentive structures for risk management to be effective. Effective risk management is realized through organizational commitment at senior levels and may require cultural change within an organization or industry.

2. Audience

Identifying and managing AI risks and potential impacts – both positive and negative – requires a broad set of perspectives and actors across the AI lifecycle. Ideally, AI actors will represent a diversity of experience, expertise, and backgrounds and comprise demographically and disciplinarily diverse teams. The AI RMF is intended to be used by AI actors across the AI lifecycle and dimensions.

AI dimensions are the Application Context, Data and Input, AI Model, and Task and Output. AI actors involved in these dimensions who perform or manage the design, development, deployment, evaluation, and use of AI systems and drive AI risk management efforts are the primary AI RMF audience.

The People & Planet dimension represents human rights and the broader well-being of society and the planet. The AI actors in this dimension comprise a separate AI RMF audience who informs the primary audience. These AI actors may include trade associations, standards developing organizations, researchers, advocacy groups, environmental groups, civil society organizations, end users, and potentially impacted individuals and communities. These actors can:

- assist in providing context and understanding potential and actual impacts;
- be a source of formal or quasi-formal norms and guidance for AI risk management;
- designate boundaries for AI operation (technical, societal, legal, and ethical); and
- promote discussion of the tradeoffs needed to balance societal values and priorities related to civil liberties and rights, equity, the environment and the planet, and the economy.

Successful risk management depends upon a sense of collective responsibility among AI actors. The AI RMF functions require diverse perspectives, disciplines, professions, and experiences. Diverse teams contribute to more open sharing of ideas and assumptions about the purposes and functions of technology – making these implicit aspects more explicit. This broader collective perspective creates opportunities for surfacing problems and identifying existing and emergent risks.

3. AI Risks and Trustworthiness

For AI systems to be trustworthy, they often need to be responsive to a multiplicity of criteria that are of value to interested parties. Approaches which enhance AI trustworthiness can reduce negative AI risks. This Framework articulates the following characteristics of trustworthy AI and offers guidance for addressing them. Characteristics of trustworthy AI systems include: valid and reliable, safe, secure and resilient, accountable and transparent, explainable and interpretable, privacy-enhanced, and fair with harmful bias managed. Creating trustworthy AI requires balancing each of these characteristics based on the AI system's context of use.

Trustworthiness characteristics are inextricably tied to social and organizational behavior, the datasets used by AI systems, selection of AI models and algorithms and the decisions made by those who build them, and the interactions with the humans who provide insight from and oversight of such systems. Human judgment should be employed when deciding on the specific metrics related to AI trustworthiness characteristics and the precise threshold values for those metrics.

Addressing AI trustworthiness characteristics individually will not ensure AI system trustworthiness; tradeoffs are usually involved, rarely do all characteristics apply in every setting, and some will be more or less important in any given situation. Ultimately, trustworthiness is a social concept that ranges across a spectrum and is only as strong as its weakest characteristics.

Trustworthiness characteristics explained in this document influence each other. Highly secure but unfair systems, accurate but opaque and uninterpretable systems, and inaccurate but secure, privacy-enhanced, and transparent systems are all undesirable. A comprehensive approach to risk management calls for balancing tradeoffs among the trustworthiness characteristics. It is the joint responsibility of all AI actors to determine whether AI technology is an appropriate or necessary tool for a given context or purpose, and how to use it responsibly.

3.1 Valid and Reliable

Validation is the "confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that the requirements for a specific intended use or application have been fulfilled" (Source: ISO 9000:2015). Deployment of AI systems which are inaccurate, unreliable, or poorly generalized to data and settings beyond their training creates and increases negative AI risks and reduces trustworthiness.

Reliability is defined as the "ability of an item to perform as required, without failure, for a given time interval, under given conditions" (Source: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022). Reliability is a goal for overall correctness of AI system operation under the conditions of expected use and over a given period of time, including the entire lifetime of the system.

Accuracy is defined by ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022 as "closeness of results of observations, computations, or estimates to the true values or the values accepted as being true." Measures of accuracy should consider computational-centric measures (e.g., false positive and false negative rates), human-AI teaming, and demonstrate external validity (generalizable beyond the training conditions).

Robustness or generalizability is defined as the "ability of a system to maintain its level of performance under a variety of circumstances" (Source: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022). Robustness is a goal for appropriate system functionality in a broad set of conditions and circumstances, including uses of AI systems not initially anticipated.

Validity and reliability for deployed AI systems are often assessed by ongoing testing or monitoring that confirms a system is performing as intended. AI risk management efforts should prioritize the minimization of potential negative impacts, and may need to include human intervention in cases where the AI system cannot detect or correct errors.

3.2 Safe

AI systems should "not under defined conditions, lead to a state in which human life, health, property, or the environment is endangered" (Source: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022). Safe operation of AI systems is improved through:

- responsible design, development, and deployment practices;
- clear information to deployers on responsible use of the system;
- responsible decision-making by deployers and end users; and
- explanations and documentation of risks based on empirical evidence of incidents.

Different types of safety risks may require tailored AI risk management approaches based on context and the severity of potential risks presented. Safety risks that pose a potential risk of serious injury or death call for the most urgent prioritization and most thorough risk management process.

Employing safety considerations during the lifecycle and starting as early as possible with planning and design can prevent failures or conditions that can render a system dangerous. Other practical approaches for AI safety often relate to rigorous simulation and in-domain testing, real-time monitoring, and the ability to shut down, modify, or have human intervention into systems that deviate from intended or expected functionality.

3.3 Secure and Resilient

AI systems, as well as the ecosystems in which they are deployed, may be said to be resilient if they can withstand unexpected adverse events or unexpected changes in their environment or use – or if they can maintain their functions and structure in the face of internal and external change and degrade safely and gracefully when this is necessary (Adapted from: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022). Common security concerns relate to adversarial examples, data poisoning, and the exfiltration of models, training data, or other intellectual property through AI system endpoints. AI systems that can maintain confidentiality, integrity, and availability through protection mechanisms that prevent unauthorized access and use may be said to be secure.

Security and resilience are related but distinct characteristics. While resilience is the ability to return to normal function after an unexpected adverse event, security includes resilience but also encompasses protocols to avoid, protect against, respond to, or recover from attacks.

3.4 Accountable and Transparent

Trustworthy AI depends upon accountability. Accountability presupposes transparency. Transparency reflects the extent to which information about an AI system and its outputs is available to individuals interacting with such a system – regardless of whether they are even aware that they are doing so. Meaningful transparency provides access to appropriate levels of information based on the stage of the AI lifecycle and tailored to the role or knowledge of AI actors or individuals interacting with or using the AI system.

This characteristic's scope spans from design decisions and training data to model training, the structure of the model, its intended use cases, and how and when deployment, post-deployment, or end user decisions were made and by whom. Transparency is often necessary for actionable redress related to AI system outputs that are incorrect or otherwise lead to negative impacts.

The role of AI actors should be considered when seeking accountability for the outcomes of AI systems. When consequences are severe, such as when life and liberty are at stake, AI developers and deployers should consider proportionally and proactively adjusting their transparency and accountability practices.

Maintaining the provenance of training data and supporting attribution of the AI system's decisions to subsets of training data can assist with both transparency and accountability.

3.5 Explainable and Interpretable

Explainability refers to a representation of the mechanisms underlying AI systems' operation, whereas interpretability refers to the meaning of AI systems' output in the context of their designed functional purposes. Together, explainability and interpretability assist those operating or overseeing an AI system, as well as users of an AI system, to gain deeper insights into the functionality and trustworthiness of the system, including its outputs.

Risk from lack of explainability may be managed by describing how AI systems function, with descriptions tailored to individual differences such as the user's role, knowledge, and skill level. Explainable systems can be debugged and monitored more easily, and they lend themselves to more thorough documentation, audit, and governance.

Transparency, explainability, and interpretability are distinct characteristics that support each other. Transparency can answer the question of "what happened" in the system. Explainability can answer the question of "how" a decision was made in the system. Interpretability can answer the question of "why" a decision was made by the system and its meaning or context to the user.

3.6 Privacy-Enhanced

Privacy refers generally to the norms and practices that help to safeguard human autonomy, identity, and dignity. These norms and practices typically address freedom from intrusion, limiting observation, or individuals' agency to consent to disclosure or control of facets of their identities (e.g., body, data, reputation).

Privacy values such as anonymity, confidentiality, and control generally should guide choices for AI system design, development, and deployment. Privacy-related risks may influence security, bias, and transparency and come with tradeoffs with these other characteristics. AI systems can also present new risks to privacy by allowing inference to identify individuals or previously private information about individuals.

Privacy-enhancing technologies ("PETs") for AI, as well as data minimizing methods such as de-identification and aggregation for certain model outputs, can support design for privacy-enhanced AI systems.

3.7 Fair – with Harmful Bias Managed

Fairness in AI includes concerns for equality and equity by addressing issues such as harmful bias and discrimination. Standards of fairness can be complex and difficult to define because perceptions of fairness differ among cultures and may shift depending on application.

NIST has identified three major categories of AI bias to be considered and managed: systemic, computational and statistical, and human-cognitive. Each of these can occur in the absence of prejudice, partiality, or discriminatory intent. Systemic bias can be present in AI datasets, the organizational norms, practices, and processes across the AI lifecycle, and the broader society that uses AI systems. Computational and statistical biases can be present in AI datasets and algorithmic processes, and often stem from systematic errors due to non-representative samples. Human-cognitive biases relate to how an individual or group perceives AI system information to make a decision or fill in missing information, or how humans think about purposes and functions of an AI system.

Bias exists in many forms and can become ingrained in the automated systems that help make decisions about our lives. While bias is not always a negative phenomenon, AI systems can potentially increase the speed and scale of biases and perpetuate and amplify harms to individuals, groups, communities, organizations, and society.

4. Effectiveness of the AI RMF

Evaluations of AI RMF effectiveness – including ways to measure bottom-line improvements in the trustworthiness of AI systems – will be part of future NIST activities, in conjunction with the AI community.

Organizations and other users of the Framework are encouraged to periodically evaluate whether the AI RMF has improved their ability to manage AI risks. Framework users are expected to benefit from:

- enhanced processes for governing, mapping, measuring, and managing AI risk, and clearly documenting outcomes;
- improved awareness of the relationships and tradeoffs among trustworthiness characteristics, socio-technical approaches, and AI risks;
- explicit processes for making go/no-go system commissioning and deployment decisions;
- established policies, processes, practices, and procedures for improving organizational accountability efforts related to AI system risks;
- enhanced organizational culture which prioritizes the identification and management of AI system risks and potential impacts to individuals, communities, organizations, and society;
- better information sharing within and across organizations about risks, decision-making processes, responsibilities, common pitfalls, TEVV practices, and approaches for continuous improvement;
- greater contextual knowledge for increased awareness of downstream risks;
- strengthened engagement with interested parties and relevant AI actors; and
- augmented capacity for TEVV of AI systems and associated risks.


Part 2: Core and Profiles

5. AI RMF Core

The AI RMF Core provides outcomes and actions that enable dialogue, understanding, and activities to manage AI risks and responsibly develop trustworthy AI systems. The Core is composed of four functions: GOVERN, MAP, MEASURE, and MANAGE. Each of these high-level functions is broken down into categories and subcategories. Categories and subcategories are subdivided into specific actions and outcomes. Actions do not constitute a checklist, nor are they necessarily an ordered set of steps.

Risk management should be continuous, timely, and performed throughout the AI system lifecycle dimensions. AI RMF Core functions should be carried out in a way that reflects diverse and multidisciplinary perspectives.

Framework users may apply these functions as best suits their needs for managing AI risks based on their resources and capabilities. Assuming a governance structure is in place, functions may be performed in any order across the AI lifecycle as deemed to add value by a user of the framework. After instituting the outcomes in GOVERN, most users of the AI RMF would start with the MAP function and continue to MEASURE or MANAGE. However users integrate the functions, the process should be iterative, with cross-referencing between functions as necessary.

5.1 Govern

The GOVERN function:

- cultivates and implements a culture of risk management within organizations designing, developing, deploying, evaluating, or acquiring AI systems;
- outlines processes, documents, and organizational schemes that anticipate, identify, and manage the risks a system can pose, including to users and others across society – and procedures to achieve those outcomes;
- incorporates processes to assess potential impacts;
- provides a structure by which AI risk management functions can align with organizational principles, policies, and strategic priorities;
- connects technical aspects of AI system design and development to organizational values and principles, and enables organizational practices and competencies for the individuals involved in acquiring, training, deploying, and monitoring such systems; and
- addresses full product lifecycle and associated processes, including legal and other issues concerning use of third-party software or hardware systems and data.

GOVERN is a cross-cutting function that is infused throughout AI risk management and enables the other functions of the process. Strong governance can drive and enhance internal practices and norms to facilitate organizational risk culture. Governing authorities can determine the overarching policies that direct an organization's mission, goals, values, culture, and risk tolerance. Senior leadership sets the tone for risk management within an organization, and with it, organizational culture.

GOVERN categories and subcategories:

GOVERN 1: Policies, processes, procedures, and practices across the organization related to the mapping, measuring, and managing of AI risks are in place, transparent, and implemented effectively.
  GOVERN 1.1: Legal and regulatory requirements involving AI are understood, managed, and documented.
  GOVERN 1.2: The characteristics of trustworthy AI are integrated into organizational policies, processes, procedures, and practices.
  GOVERN 1.3: Processes, procedures, and practices are in place to determine the needed level of risk management activities based on the organization's risk tolerance.
  GOVERN 1.4: The risk management process and its outcomes are established through transparent policies, procedures, and other controls based on organizational risk priorities.
  GOVERN 1.5: Ongoing monitoring and periodic review of the risk management process and its outcomes are planned and organizational roles and responsibilities clearly defined, including determining the frequency of periodic review.
  GOVERN 1.6: Mechanisms are in place to inventory AI systems and are resourced according to organizational risk priorities.
  GOVERN 1.7: Processes and procedures are in place for decommissioning and phasing out AI systems safely and in a manner that does not increase risks or decrease the organization's trustworthiness.

GOVERN 2: Accountability structures are in place so that the appropriate teams and individuals are empowered, responsible, and trained for mapping, measuring, and managing AI risks.
  GOVERN 2.1: Roles and responsibilities and lines of communication related to mapping, measuring, and managing AI risks are documented and are clear to individuals and teams throughout the organization.
  GOVERN 2.2: The organization's personnel and partners receive AI risk management training to enable them to perform their duties and responsibilities consistent with related policies, procedures, and agreements.
  GOVERN 2.3: Executive leadership of the organization takes responsibility for decisions about risks associated with AI system development and deployment.

GOVERN 3: Workforce diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility processes are prioritized in the mapping, measuring, and managing of AI risks throughout the lifecycle.
  GOVERN 3.1: Decision-making related to mapping, measuring, and managing AI risks throughout the lifecycle is informed by a diverse team (e.g., diversity of demographics, disciplines, experience, expertise, and backgrounds).
  GOVERN 3.2: Policies and procedures are in place to define and differentiate roles and responsibilities for human-AI configurations and oversight of AI systems.

GOVERN 4: Organizational teams are committed to a culture that considers and communicates AI risk.
  GOVERN 4.1: Organizational policies and practices are in place to foster a critical thinking and safety-first mindset in the design, development, deployment, and uses of AI systems to minimize potential negative impacts.
  GOVERN 4.2: Organizational teams document the risks and potential impacts of the AI technology they design, develop, deploy, evaluate, and use, and they communicate about the impacts more broadly.
  GOVERN 4.3: Organizational practices are in place to enable AI testing, identification of incidents, and information sharing.

GOVERN 5: Processes are in place for robust engagement with relevant AI actors.
  GOVERN 5.1: Organizational policies and practices are in place to collect, consider, prioritize, and integrate feedback from those external to the team that developed or deployed the AI system regarding the potential individual and societal impacts related to AI risks.
  GOVERN 5.2: Mechanisms are established to enable the team that developed or deployed AI systems to regularly incorporate adjudicated feedback from relevant AI actors into system design and implementation.

GOVERN 6: Policies and procedures are in place to address AI risks and benefits arising from third-party software and data and other supply chain issues.
  GOVERN 6.1: Policies and procedures are in place that address AI risks associated with third-party entities, including risks of infringement of a third-party's intellectual property or other rights.
  GOVERN 6.2: Contingency processes are in place to handle failures or incidents in third-party data or AI systems deemed to be high-risk.

5.2 Map

The MAP function establishes the context to frame risks related to an AI system. The AI lifecycle consists of many interdependent activities involving a diverse set of actors. In practice, AI actors in charge of one part of the process often do not have full visibility or control over other parts and their associated contexts. The interdependencies between these activities, and among the relevant AI actors, can make it difficult to reliably anticipate impacts of AI systems.

The information gathered while carrying out the MAP function enables negative risk prevention and informs decisions for processes such as model management, as well as an initial decision about appropriateness or the need for an AI solution. Outcomes in the MAP function are the basis for the MEASURE and MANAGE functions.

MAP categories and subcategories:

MAP 1: Context is established and understood.
  MAP 1.1: Intended purposes, potentially beneficial uses, context-specific laws, norms and expectations, and prospective settings in which the AI system will be deployed are understood and documented.
  MAP 1.2: Interdisciplinary AI actors, competencies, skills, and capacities for establishing context reflect demographic diversity and broad domain and user experience expertise, and their participation is documented.
  MAP 1.3: The organization's mission and relevant goals for AI technology are understood and documented.
  MAP 1.4: The business value or context of business use has been clearly defined or – in the case of assessing existing AI systems – re-evaluated.
  MAP 1.5: Organizational risk tolerances are determined and documented.
  MAP 1.6: System requirements are elicited from and understood by relevant AI actors. Design decisions take socio-technical implications into account to address AI risks.

MAP 2: Categorization of the AI system is performed.
  MAP 2.1: The specific tasks and methods used to implement the tasks that the AI system will support are defined (e.g., classifiers, generative models, recommenders).
  MAP 2.2: Information about the AI system's knowledge limits and how system output may be utilized and overseen by humans is documented.
  MAP 2.3: Scientific integrity and TEVV considerations are identified and documented, including those related to experimental design, data collection and selection, system trustworthiness, and construct validation.

MAP 3: AI capabilities, targeted usage, goals, and expected benefits and costs compared with appropriate benchmarks are understood.
  MAP 3.1: Potential benefits of intended AI system functionality and performance are examined and documented.
  MAP 3.2: Potential costs, including non-monetary costs, which result from expected or realized AI errors or system functionality and trustworthiness are examined and documented.
  MAP 3.3: Targeted application scope is specified and documented based on the system's capability, established context, and AI system categorization.
  MAP 3.4: Processes for operator and practitioner proficiency with AI system performance and trustworthiness are defined, assessed, and documented.
  MAP 3.5: Processes for human oversight are defined, assessed, and documented in accordance with organizational policies from the GOVERN function.

MAP 4: Risks and benefits are mapped for all components of the AI system including third-party software and data.
  MAP 4.1: Approaches for mapping AI technology and legal risks of its components – including the use of third-party data or software – are in place, followed, and documented.
  MAP 4.2: Internal risk controls for components of the AI system, including third-party AI technologies, are identified and documented.

MAP 5: Impacts to individuals, groups, communities, organizations, and society are characterized.
  MAP 5.1: Likelihood and magnitude of each identified impact (both potentially beneficial and harmful) based on expected use, past uses of AI systems in similar contexts, public incident reports, feedback from those external to the team that developed or deployed the AI system, or other data are identified and documented.
  MAP 5.2: Practices and personnel for supporting regular engagement with relevant AI actors and integrating feedback about positive, negative, and unanticipated impacts are in place and documented.

5.3 Measure

The MEASURE function employs quantitative, qualitative, or mixed-method tools, techniques, and methodologies to analyze, assess, benchmark, and monitor AI risk and related impacts. It uses knowledge relevant to AI risks identified in the MAP function and informs the MANAGE function. AI systems should be tested before their deployment and regularly while in operation.

Measuring AI risks includes tracking metrics for trustworthy characteristics, social impact, and human-AI configurations. Processes developed or adopted in the MEASURE function should include rigorous software testing and performance assessment methodologies with associated measures of uncertainty, comparisons to performance benchmarks, and formalized reporting and documentation of results.

MEASURE categories and subcategories:

MEASURE 1: Appropriate methods and metrics are identified and applied.
  MEASURE 1.1: Approaches and metrics for measurement of AI risks enumerated during the MAP function are selected for implementation starting with the most significant AI risks.
  MEASURE 1.2: Appropriateness of AI metrics and effectiveness of existing controls are regularly assessed and updated, including reports of errors and potential impacts on affected communities.
  MEASURE 1.3: Internal experts who did not serve as front-line developers for the system and/or independent assessors are involved in regular assessments and updates.

MEASURE 2: AI systems are evaluated for trustworthy characteristics.
  MEASURE 2.1: Test sets, metrics, and details about the tools used during TEVV are documented.
  MEASURE 2.2: Evaluations involving human subjects meet applicable requirements (including human subject protection) and are representative of the relevant population.
  MEASURE 2.3: AI system performance or assurance criteria are measured qualitatively or quantitatively and demonstrated for conditions similar to deployment setting(s).
  MEASURE 2.4: The functionality and behavior of the AI system and its components are monitored when in production.
  MEASURE 2.5: The AI system to be deployed is demonstrated to be valid and reliable. Limitations of the generalizability beyond the conditions under which the technology was developed are documented.
  MEASURE 2.6: The AI system is evaluated regularly for safety risks. The AI system to be deployed is demonstrated to be safe, its residual negative risk does not exceed the risk tolerance, and it can fail safely.
  MEASURE 2.7: AI system security and resilience are evaluated and documented.
  MEASURE 2.8: Risks associated with transparency and accountability are examined and documented.
  MEASURE 2.9: The AI model is explained, validated, and documented, and AI system output is interpreted within its context to inform responsible use and governance.
  MEASURE 2.10: Privacy risk of the AI system is examined and documented.
  MEASURE 2.11: Fairness and bias are evaluated and results are documented.
  MEASURE 2.12: Environmental impact and sustainability of AI model training and management activities are assessed and documented.
  MEASURE 2.13: Effectiveness of the employed TEVV metrics and processes in the MEASURE function are evaluated and documented.

MEASURE 3: Mechanisms for tracking identified AI risks over time are in place.
  MEASURE 3.1: Approaches, personnel, and documentation are in place to regularly identify and track existing, unanticipated, and emergent AI risks.
  MEASURE 3.2: Risk tracking approaches are considered for settings where AI risks are difficult to assess using currently available measurement techniques or where metrics are not yet available.
  MEASURE 3.3: Feedback processes for end users and impacted communities to report problems and appeal system outcomes are established and integrated into AI system evaluation metrics.

MEASURE 4: Feedback about efficacy of measurement is gathered and assessed.
  MEASURE 4.1: Measurement approaches for identifying AI risks are connected to deployment context(s) and informed through consultation with domain experts and other end users.
  MEASURE 4.2: Measurement results regarding AI system trustworthiness in deployment context(s) and across the AI lifecycle are informed by input from domain experts and relevant AI actors.
  MEASURE 4.3: Measurable performance improvements or declines based on consultations with relevant AI actors, including affected communities, and field data about context-relevant risks and trustworthiness characteristics are identified and documented.

5.4 Manage

The MANAGE function entails allocating risk resources to mapped and measured risks on a regular basis and as defined by the GOVERN function. Risk treatment comprises plans to respond to, recover from, and communicate about incidents or events.

Contextual information gleaned from expert consultation and input from relevant AI actors – established in GOVERN and carried out in MAP – is utilized in this function to decrease the likelihood of system failures and negative impacts. Systematic documentation practices established in GOVERN and utilized in MAP and MEASURE bolster AI risk management efforts and increase transparency and accountability.

MANAGE categories and subcategories:

MANAGE 1: AI risks based on assessments and other analytical output from the MAP and MEASURE functions are prioritized, responded to, and managed.
  MANAGE 1.1: A determination is made as to whether the AI system achieves its intended purposes and stated objectives and whether its development or deployment should proceed.
  MANAGE 1.2: Treatment of documented AI risks is prioritized based on impact, likelihood, and available resources or methods.
  MANAGE 1.3: Responses to the AI risks deemed high priority are developed, planned, and documented. Risk response options can include mitigating, transferring, avoiding, or accepting.
  MANAGE 1.4: Negative residual risks to both downstream acquirers of AI systems and end users are documented.

MANAGE 2: Strategies to maximize AI benefits and minimize negative impacts are planned, prepared, implemented, documented, and informed by input from relevant AI actors.
  MANAGE 2.1: Resources required to manage AI risks are taken into account – along with viable non-AI alternative systems, approaches, or methods – to reduce the magnitude or likelihood of potential impacts.
  MANAGE 2.2: Mechanisms are in place and applied to sustain the value of deployed AI systems.
  MANAGE 2.3: Procedures are followed to respond to and recover from a previously unknown risk when it is identified.
  MANAGE 2.4: Mechanisms are in place and applied, and responsibilities are assigned and understood, to supersede, disengage, or deactivate AI systems that demonstrate performance or outcomes inconsistent with intended use.

MANAGE 3: AI risks and benefits from third-party entities are managed.
  MANAGE 3.1: AI risks and benefits from third-party resources are regularly monitored, and risk controls are applied and documented.
  MANAGE 3.2: Pre-trained models which are used for development are monitored as part of AI system regular monitoring and maintenance.

MANAGE 4: Risk treatments, including response and recovery, and communication plans for the identified and measured AI risks are documented and monitored regularly.
  MANAGE 4.1: Post-deployment AI system monitoring plans are implemented, including mechanisms for capturing and evaluating input from users and other relevant AI actors, appeal and override, decommissioning, incident response, recovery, and change management.
  MANAGE 4.2: Measurable activities for continual improvements are integrated into AI system updates and include regular engagement with interested parties, including relevant AI actors.
  MANAGE 4.3: Incidents and errors are communicated to relevant AI actors, including affected communities. Processes for tracking, responding to, and recovering from incidents and errors are followed and documented.

6. AI RMF Profiles

AI RMF use-case profiles are implementations of the AI RMF functions, categories, and subcategories for a specific setting or application based on the requirements, risk tolerance, and resources of the Framework user. Profiles may illustrate and offer insights into how risk can be managed at various stages of the AI lifecycle or in specific sector, technology, or end-use applications.

AI RMF temporal profiles are descriptions of either the current state or the desired, target state of specific AI risk management activities within a given sector, industry, organization, or application context. An AI RMF Current Profile indicates how AI is currently being managed and the related risks in terms of current outcomes. A Target Profile indicates the outcomes needed to achieve the desired or target AI risk management goals.

AI RMF cross-sectoral profiles cover risks of models or applications that can be used across use cases or sectors. Cross-sectoral profiles can also cover how to govern, map, measure, and manage risks for activities or business processes common across sectors such as the use of large language models, cloud-based services or acquisition.

This Framework does not prescribe profile templates, allowing for flexibility in implementation.


Appendix A: Descriptions of AI Actor Tasks

AI Design tasks are performed during the Application Context and Data and Input phases of the AI lifecycle. AI Design actors create the concept and objectives of AI systems and are responsible for the planning, design, and data collection and processing tasks. AI actors in this category include data scientists, domain experts, socio-cultural analysts, experts in the field of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility, members of impacted communities, human factors experts (e.g., UX/UI design), governance experts, data engineers, data providers, system funders, product managers, third-party entities, evaluators, and legal and privacy governance.

AI Development tasks are performed during the AI Model phase of the lifecycle. AI Development actors provide the initial infrastructure of AI systems and are responsible for model building and interpretation tasks, which involve the creation, selection, calibration, training, and/or testing of models or algorithms. AI actors in this category include machine learning experts, data scientists, developers, third-party entities, legal and privacy governance experts, and experts in the socio-cultural and contextual factors associated with the deployment setting.

AI Deployment tasks are performed during the Task and Output phase of the lifecycle. AI Deployment actors are responsible for contextual decisions relating to how the AI system is used to assure deployment of the system into production. Related tasks include piloting the system, checking compatibility with legacy systems, ensuring regulatory compliance, managing organizational change, and evaluating user experience.

Operation and Monitoring tasks are performed in the Application Context/Operate and Monitor phase of the lifecycle. These tasks are carried out by AI actors who are responsible for operating the AI system and working with others to regularly assess system output and impacts.

Test, Evaluation, Verification, and Validation (TEVV) tasks are performed throughout the AI lifecycle. They are carried out by AI actors who examine the AI system or its components, or detect and remediate problems.

Human Factors tasks and activities are found throughout the dimensions of the AI lifecycle. They include human-centered design practices and methodologies, promoting the active involvement of end users and other interested parties and relevant AI actors, incorporating context-specific norms and values in system design, evaluating and adapting end user experiences.

Domain Expert tasks involve input from multidisciplinary practitioners or scholars who provide knowledge or expertise in – and about – an industry sector, economic sector, context, or application area where an AI system is being used.

AI Impact Assessment tasks include assessing and evaluating requirements for AI system accountability, combating harmful bias, examining impacts of AI systems, product safety, liability, and security, among others.

Third-party entities include providers, developers, vendors, and evaluators of data, algorithms, models, and/or systems and related services. By definition, they are external to the design, development, or deployment team of the organization that acquires its technologies or services.

End users of an AI system are the individuals or groups that use the system for specific purposes. End users can range in competency from AI experts to first-time technology end users.

Affected individuals/communities encompass all individuals, groups, communities, or organizations directly or indirectly affected by AI systems or decisions based on the output of AI systems.


Appendix B: How AI Risks Differ from Traditional Software Risks

Compared to traditional software, AI-specific risks that are new or increased include the following:

- The data used for building an AI system may not be a true or appropriate representation of the context or intended use of the AI system, and the ground truth may either not exist or not be available. Additionally, harmful bias and other data quality issues can affect AI system trustworthiness, which could lead to negative impacts.
- AI system dependency and reliance on data for training tasks, combined with increased volume and complexity typically associated with such data.
- Intentional or unintentional changes during training may fundamentally alter AI system performance.
- Datasets used to train AI systems may become detached from their original and intended context or may become stale or outdated relative to deployment context.
- AI system scale and complexity (many systems contain billions or even trillions of decision points) housed within more traditional software applications.
- Use of pre-trained models that can advance research and improve performance can also increase levels of statistical uncertainty and cause issues with bias management, scientific validity, and reproducibility.
- Higher degree of difficulty in predicting failure modes for emergent properties of large-scale pre-trained models.
- Privacy risk due to enhanced data aggregation capability for AI systems.
- AI systems may require more frequent maintenance and triggers for conducting corrective maintenance due to data, model, or concept drift.
- Increased opacity and concerns about reproducibility.
- Underdeveloped software testing standards and inability to document AI-based practices to the standard expected of traditionally engineered software for all but the simplest of cases.
- Difficulty in performing regular AI-based software testing, or determining what to test, since AI systems are not subject to the same controls as traditional code development.
- Computational costs for developing AI systems and their impact on the environment and planet.
- Inability to predict or detect the side effects of AI-based systems beyond statistical measures.

Existing frameworks and guidance are unable to: adequately manage the problem of harmful bias in AI systems; confront the challenging risks related to generative AI; comprehensively address security concerns related to evasion, model extraction, membership inference, availability, or other machine learning attacks; account for the complex attack surface of AI systems or other security abuses enabled by AI systems; and consider risks associated with third-party AI technologies, transfer learning, and off-label use.


Appendix C: AI Risk Management and Human-AI Interaction

Organizations that design, develop, or deploy AI systems for use in operational settings may enhance their AI risk management by understanding current limitations of human-AI interaction.

Issues that merit further consideration and research include:

1. Human roles and responsibilities in decision making and overseeing AI systems need to be clearly defined and differentiated. Human-AI configurations can span from fully autonomous to fully manual. AI systems can autonomously make decisions, defer decision making to a human expert, or be used by a human decision maker as an additional opinion. Some AI systems may not require human oversight, such as models used to improve video compression. Other systems may specifically require human oversight.

2. Decisions that go into the design, development, deployment, evaluation, and use of AI systems reflect systemic and human cognitive biases. AI actors bring their cognitive biases, both individual and group, into the process. Biases can stem from end-user decision-making tasks and be introduced across the AI lifecycle via human assumptions, expectations, and decisions during design and modeling tasks. These biases, which are not necessarily always harmful, may be exacerbated by AI system opacity and the resulting lack of transparency.

3. Human-AI interaction results vary. Under certain conditions – for example, in perceptual-based judgment tasks – the AI part of the human-AI interaction can amplify human biases, leading to more biased decisions than the AI or human alone. When these variations are judiciously taken into account in organizing human-AI teams, however, they can result in complementarity and improved overall performance.

4. Presenting AI system information to humans is complex. Humans perceive and derive meaning from AI system output and explanations in different ways, reflecting different individual preferences, traits, and skills.


Appendix D: Attributes of the AI RMF

The AI RMF strives to:

1. Be risk-based, resource-efficient, pro-innovation, and voluntary.
2. Be consensus-driven and developed and regularly updated through an open, transparent process. All stakeholders should have the opportunity to contribute to the AI RMF's development.
3. Use clear and plain language that is understandable by a broad audience, including senior executives, government officials, non-governmental organization leadership, and those who are not AI professionals – while still of sufficient technical depth to be useful to practitioners.
4. Provide common language and understanding to manage AI risks. The AI RMF should offer taxonomy, terminology, definitions, metrics, and characterizations for AI risk.
5. Be easily usable and fit well with other aspects of risk management. Use of the Framework should be intuitive and readily adaptable as part of an organization's broader risk management strategy and processes.
6. Be useful to a wide range of perspectives, sectors, and technology domains. The AI RMF should be universally applicable to any AI technology and to context-specific use cases.
7. Be outcome-focused and non-prescriptive. The Framework should provide a catalog of outcomes and approaches rather than prescribe one-size-fits-all requirements.
8. Take advantage of and foster greater awareness of existing standards, guidelines, best practices, methodologies, and tools for managing AI risks.
9. Be law- and regulation-agnostic. The Framework should support organizations' abilities to operate under applicable domestic and international legal or regulatory regimes.
10. Be a living document. The AI RMF should be readily updated as technology, understanding, and approaches to AI trustworthiness and uses of AI change.
